---
title: How to Become an Obscure Public Sociologist
author: Benjamin Geer
type: post
date: 2015-03-10T04:13:51+00:00
slug: how-to-become-an-obscure-public-sociologist
translationKey: how-to-become-an-obscure-public-sociologist
categories:
  - Essays
tags:
  - Public Sociology
  - Social Movements
---

In the year 2000, I moved from New York to London. The protests
against the World Trade Organization conference in Seattle had just
taken place, and similar social movements were springing up around the
world. I played a small role in this 'alter-globalisation'[^1] movement,
as one of the founders of a [short-lived London
branch](http://web.archive.org/web/20020805164825/http://www.attac.org.uk/attac/html/index.vm)
of the international [ATTAC](http://www.attac.org) network. Launched in
France in 1998, ATTAC opposed neoliberal economics and advocated
policies that aimed to limit the power of the global financial
markets. As a French speaker with a good knowledge of French
intellectual life, I tried to be an intermediary between British and
French activist circles. I was also involved in the the [European
Social Forum (ESF)](http://www.fse-esf.org/), one of the regional
offshoots of the [World Social
Forum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Social_Forum), whose
founding ATTAC had been involved in.

Before the advent of free, easy-to-use online collaboration tools like
Google Groups, a friend and I drew on our experience in software
development and in the [Free
Software](https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html) movement to set
up such tools for ATTAC and the ESF, to take decision-making out of
meetings (which, we argued, are inherently exclusive and lead to a
'meetingocracy' of people who have the leisure time and resources to
attend) and into online spaces that are more transparent and
accessible. We published a manifesto for open voluntary and activist
groups, called [Open
Organizations](https://web.archive.org/web/20100609184512/http://www.open-organizations.org/view/Main/WebHome). This
was probably my first step away from activism and towards sociological
thinking about social movements.

In 2002, I told Bernard Cassen, one of ATTAC's founders, that I
thought the 'war on terror' might well derail the alter-globalisation
movement by absorbing all the energy of the left; he said not to
worry. I turned out to be an example of my own prediction. By February
2003, I had drifted away from ATTAC and was [demonstrating in Hyde
Park against the invasion of
Iraq](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/2765041.stm). It struck me
then that in the London activist circles I knew, hardly anyone seemed
to speak Arabic or know much about the Arab world. That year, I
started to learn Arabic, and in 2005 I quit my job and moved to Egypt
to study the language full-time.

Egypt was, then as now, an authoritarian state, but in those days it
was easy, safe, and inexpensive for foreigners to live, study, and do
research there. While learning the language, I became increasingly
interested in intellectuals and the history of ideas in Egypt, and in
2007 I returned to London to do an MA and PhD in Middle East Studies
at [SOAS](http://www.soas.ac.uk). I had become convinced that it was
hardly possible to understand anything about cultural production since
the 19th century, in Egypt or elsewhere, without a good analysis of
nationalism. Not convinced by any of the dominant theories of
nationalism, I started looking for a suitable theoretical
framework. After taking a tour of the varieties of social theory then
in vogue, I began to construct an analysis of nationalism by adapting
Bourdieu's little-known analysis of religion[^2] (which was the source of
his theory of fields). I published [my first attempt at
this](https://edoc.unibas.ch/61094/) in the top Middle East Studies
journal, where it has languished in obscurity. For [my
PhD](https://eprints.soas.ac.uk/13185/) (during which I returned to
Egypt for a year), I took a more ambitious approach, using Arabic
literary and historical sources going back to the 9th century CE, and
combining field theory with cognitive linguistics, to propose a
history of the production of nationalist concepts in Arabic. This
approach met with a great deal of scepticism from peers, as I found
when I submitted versions of it to journals or presented it at
conferences.

As you may have guessed, a PhD in area studies,[from a non-top-ranked
university](https://chroniclevitae.com/news/929-academia-s-1-percent),
resulting in an interdisciplinary thesis that dealt with Egyptian
nationalism and involved sociology, history, literature, and cognitive
linguistics (itself a heterodox branch of linguistics), and set out
unpopular claims, made me practically unemployable. I seemed to be too
sociological for Middle East Studies, but had no chance of getting a
job in sociology without a PhD from a sociology department. In any
case, I discovered that sociology is highly compartmentalised along
methodologically nationalist lines, with American sociologists seeing
themselves as champions of something called 'American sociology',
which is supposed to be about 'American society', and British and
French sociologists pursuing similar illusions. The study of
nationalism itself, which should be a central preoccupation of
sociology&mdash;since it is an omnipresent social phenomenon with
immense effects everywhere in the world (including effects on
sociology)&mdash;is mostly relegated to a disciplinary backwater
called 'nationalism studies', a field dominated by nationalists rather
than by critics of nationalism like me. I saw little chance of
publishing the sort of research I was doing except in area-studies
journals, which mainstream sociologists don't read.

I spent a year as Visiting Assistant Professor and Associate Director
of the Middle East Studies Center at the American University in Cairo,
and a year as a post-doc at the National University of Singapore. In
Singapore I devoted about half my time to applying for jobs, each of
which had hundreds of other applicants, an experience that no doubt
sharpened my critical view of academia. Deeply impressed by Bourdieu's
notion of scientific autonomy, and inspired by the debates about
public sociology that had followed Michael Burawoy's 2005 article,[^3] I
thought about these concepts in light of my own experiences in
activism and in academia, and formulated a few principles that I've
tried to follow:

  1. **Nationalist assumptions are inimical to the autonomy of
     sociology.** If you see the discipline of sociology as divided
     into national teams like the World Cup, and see your job as
     helping your team win, you're creating obstacles for science.
	 
  2. **Social phenomena do not, in general, stop at national borders
     any more than the weather does.** If you believe you're studying
     'British society', you've defined your work in terms of an
     illusion. It can, of course, be interesting to study illusions,
     as in my research on nationalism, but this requires the
     researcher to recognise them as such rather than internalise them
     as analytical categories.
	 
  3. **Sociology can and should aim to produce universally valid
     theoretical work.** I was once asked, in an academic job
     interview in the US, why I was using a European theorist
     (Bourdieu) to explain events in Egypt: shouldn't I be using an
     Arab theory instead? I answered as diplomatically as I could that
     Arab scholars use Marx, Gramsci, Foucault, Bourdieu, etc., just
     like everyone else, and that trying to create an 'Arab theory'
     for 'Arab society' would, in my view, be as misguided as trying
     to create an 'American theory' for 'American
     society'. Nationalism, for example, is a global phenomenon with
     many universal features (as well as many variations between
     nationalisms), and no theoretical understanding of nationalism is
     worth anything unless it can be used to analyse any nationalism,
     anywhere. (I didn't get the job.)
	 
  4. **Be prepared to pay a high price for autonomy.** Bourdieu argued
     that a 'liberating science' must be, first of all, an autonomous
     science,[^4] and that this has to include autonomy from political
     aims. This must be one of the least popular assertions ever made
     by a sociologist. A great deal of research seems implicitly to
     base its claims to legitimacy, to a greater or lesser extent, on
     a moral stance&mdash;taking the side of the oppressed, or
     promoting what the researcher sees as the national
     interest&mdash;rather than on scientific criteria of
     evaluation. Certain terms, such as 'neoliberalism', 'late
     capitalism', and 'the West', seem to be used mainly to imply that
     the research that contains them is a substitute for or supplement
     to activism, rather than for any theoretical value. In studies of
     social movements, the desire to celebrate 'resistance' often
     produces romanticised scholarly narratives in which 'the
     protesters' or 'the people' appear to be moving inexorably
     towards triumph, much as 'the proletariat' did in scholarship of
     an earlier era. This partly explains why few scholars are willing
     to criticise nationalism: regardless of whether they are
     nationalists themselves (which most are), they feel an obligation
     to support anything that is associated with 'resistance' and
     embraced by the downtrodden, never mind whether it leads to
     military dictatorship, warmongering, ethnic cleansing,
     ideological witch hunts, xenophobia, and so on. A sociologist who
     takes Bourdieu's argument seriously puts herself in an awkward
     position: not only does she deprive herself of the career
     benefits of conforming to the expectations of peer reviewers and
     search committees, she is also likely to disappoint lay
     audiences.
	 
  5. **The people you write about should be able to find out what
     you're saying about them.** Otherwise, research resembles gossip,
     or talking about people behind their backs. Open-access
     publication is the bare minimum required to enable laypeople to
     benefit from your research as well as to criticise it. After I
     published an [open-access article in
     English](https://doi.org/10.4000/ejts.4780) on an activist group
     that campaigned for university autonomy in Egypt, I got immediate
     feedback (positive, to my great relief) from some of the
     participants in the study. However, I also wanted the article to
     be accessible to people in Egypt who don't read English, so I
     published it again in an [Arabic
     translation](https://edoc.unibas.ch/61091/), in an
     Arabic-language sociology journal. I also [blogged about it in
     three languages]({{< ref
     "2014-05-15-the-making-of-autonomy-and-symbolic-capital-in-an-academic-social-movement"
     >}}).
	 
What has the result of all this been in my case? Not much, probably. I
have an [alt-ac
job](http://sociologicalimagination.org/archives/17966) that gives me
a bit of time for research and writing, but I expect it will take me
several years to turn my PhD thesis into a book. I seem to have found
the perfect recipe for becoming an obscure public sociologist.

[^1]: See Geoffrey Pleyers, _Alter-Globalization: Becoming Actors in a
Global Age_ (Cambridge: Polity, 2010).

[^2]: See Franz Schultheis, ['Salvation Goods and Domination: Pierre
Bourdieu's Sociology of the Religious
Field'](https://www.alexandria.unisg.ch/publications/42236), in
_Salvation Goods and Religious Markets: Theory and Applications_,
ed. Jörg Stolz (Bern: Peter Lang, 2008).

[^3]: Michael Burawoy, ['For Public
Sociology'](http://burawoy.berkeley.edu/Public%20Sociology,%20Live/Burawoy.pdf),
_American Sociological Review_ 70, no. 1 (February 2005): 4-28.

[^4]: Pierre Bourdieu, ['Fourth Lecture. Universal Corporatism: The
Role of Intellectuals in the Modern
World'](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1772708), _Poetics Today_ 12,
no. 4 (1991): 655-669.
